Add Euclid landing pages and flatten TOC (#206)
Caltech-IPAC/irsa-tutorials: tutorials/euclid_access/euclid.md

----
short_title: "Euclid"
----

(euclid)=
# Euclid Tutorial Notebooks

The notebooks in this section introduce the [Euclid](https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/Missions/euclid.html) data releases and products, and demonstrate access using various methods.
They are organized by data release.

(euclid-ero)=
## Early Release Observations (ERO)

This notebook describes the [Euclid ERO](https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/Euclid/docs/overview_ero.html) data products and demonstrates access.

- [Star Clusters](#euclid-ero-star-clusters) — Create multi-wavelength ERO image cutouts of a globular cluster, extract sources, and measure photometry.
  Then load Gaia sources at the location of the globular cluster, match with Euclid ERO catalogs, and visualize the results with Firefly.

(euclid-q1)=
## Quick Release 1 (Q1)

> These notebooks describe the [Euclid Q1](https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/Euclid/docs/overview_q1.html) data products and demonstrate access using various methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These notebooks describe the [Euclid Q1](https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/Euclid/docs/overview_q1.html) data products and demonstrate access using two different techniques; what we will call VO and HATS below.```

  Then plot the SIR spectrum of the brightest galaxy and look at a MER mosaic cutout of the galaxy in Firefly.
- [SPE Catalogs](#euclid-q1-vo-spe-catalogs) — Join spectroscopic and MER catalogs and query for galaxies with H-alpha line detections, then plot the SIR spectrum of a galaxy with a high SNR H-alpha line measurement.

(euclid-q1-cloud-series)=
### Cloud Access to Images, Spectra, and Catalogs

IRSA also serves the Euclid Q1 data in FITS and Apache Parquet file formats from an Amazon Web Services (AWS) S3 cloud storage bucket.
This tutorial demonstrates access using the Python libraries [S3Fs](https://s3fs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [Astropy](https://astropy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).
S3 is well-suited for most use cases and is especially efficient for large-scale data access.

- [Cloud Access](#euclid-q1-cloud) — Browse the S3 bucket, then efficiently retrieve a MER mosaic cutout and a SIR spectrum.
- See [Merged Objects HATS Catalog](#euclid-q1-hats-series) for efficient access to the on-cloud catalogs.

(euclid-q1-hats-series)=

> ### Merged Objects HATS Catalog

Author: I keep wondering about these anchors. They're great because we can change file names and heading text without breaking the links, and that's super helpful. But on the other hand, they make the links totally useless outside of the website. When looking at the markdown files, even on github where the markdown is rendered, the links don't work at all and the reader is lost. I don't know what to do about that.

Reviewer 2: hmm, that's a good point, I totally was focusing on the rendered outputs and was not even thinking about the notebooks themselves. 

If we don't yet track this issue upstream, let me add it to the "papercut with notebooks" list.

Reviewer 3: That's a valid complaint but isn't that expected?! I mean a renderer decides how to render anchor - this syntax doesn't mean anything to Github markdown same as how frontmatter doesn't mean anything. So Github markdown just renders it as text and rather creates heading-text-based anchors. Whereas it has a meaning for the JB website renderer so it shows up as expected. 

Do you expect people to linking anchors or other items from the Github markdown doc as opposed to from our documentation website?

Reviewer 3: Thinking more about it...I think we can get best of both worlds by refraining from using these special header targets for H1 headings because then you can just link the document path.

Reviewer 2: Just to rephrase, if we need to drop one of the 3 access points, I would totally drop the Github rendering. It doesn't matter how things look on github as our end user products are the website and the notebooks. (and we know a bunch of myst stuff is already broken in github markdown rendering as it doesn't speak the myst flavour of the format)

Author: The github rendering is just one example of how users interact with the markdown files, which we definitely expect them to do. I don't think it's a big deal that the frontmatter and admonitions look as they do, but links not working is significant. Not saying it's more important than the other 2 access points, just that there is tension here that is not insignificant.

Are there good reasons not to use standard markdown syntax to link to sections? For example, when I want to put a link in the euclid hats notebooks to the hats section of this landing page, standard markdown syntax would look something like `[link name](../euclid_access/euclid.md#merged-objects-hats-catalog)` and no anchor (or myst label or header target) would be needed. That will be more work for us to maintain, but if it means the links will work everywhere then we should do it.

The Euclid Q1 Merged Objects HATS Catalog comprises fourteen of the original Euclid Q1 catalogs, joined on the Euclid object ID, into a single dataset.
The catalog is in Apache Parquet file format and is stored on AWS S3.
These tutorials use the Python [Apache PyArrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html) library for efficient data access.
HATS, Parquet, and PyArrow are described further on [IRSA Parquet Catalogs](https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/parquet_catalogs/).
These methods are well-suited for most use cases and are especially good for large-scale analyses.

> - [Introduction](#euclid-q1-hats-intro) — Understand the content and format of the Euclid Q1 Merged Objects HATS Catalog, then perform a basic query.

Reviewer 3: is there a specific reason for linking the custom anchors for H1 heading for a notebook rather than linking the notebook document path itself (assuming that is possible)? 

```suggestion
- [Introduction](../parquet-catalog-demos/euclid-q1-hats/1-euclid-q1-hats-intro) — Understand the content and format of the Euclid Q1 Merged Objects HATS Catalog, then perform a basic query.
```

I'm not certain but this may resolve several complaints with Github markdown rendering, because Github recognizes path-based linking IIRC.

Reviewer 2: it may not create hovers though and I suspect neither of these would work in a jupyterlab setting?
